README.md, before:

# Pose2Play - AI-Powered Rehabilitation System

Real-time exercise form analysis and adaptive difficulty adjustment using computer vision and reinforcement learning.

## 🎯 Features

- **Real-time Pose Detection** - MediaPipe tracks 33 body landmarks at 30 FPS
- **Exercise Form Analysis** - ML classifier detects correct vs incorrect form (70.9% accuracy)
- **RL-Powered Difficulty Adjustment** - Agent learned optimal encouragement strategy (100% completion rate)
- **Gamification** - Recovery Points, levels, achievements, streaks
- **Adaptive Learning** - Per-user personalized targets based on performance history
- **Real-time Feedback** - Specific form corrections ("Squat deeper", "Balance evenly")

## 🏥 Target Exercises

- Squats (knee rehabilitation)
- Hip Abduction/Adduction (hip strengthening)
- Knee Flexion (knee mobility)
- Shoulder Raises (shoulder rehabilitation)

## 📦 Project Structure

```
Pose2Play base model iteration 1/
├── demo/
│   └── index.html           # Main web application
├── ml/
│   ├── data/
│   │   └── processed/       # Processed dataset (train/val/test)
│   ├── models/
│   │   ├── dqn/            # RL difficulty adjustment model
│   │   └── form_classifier/ # Form classification model
│   ├── train_rl.py         # Train RL agent
│   ├── train_form_classifier.py  # Train form classifier
│   ├── api_server.py       # Flask API server
│   ├── data_processor.py   # Dataset preprocessing
│   └── test_form_api.py    # API testing
├── shared/
│   └── models/
│       └── pose_landmarker_lite.task  # MediaPipe model
├── START_PHASE7.ps1        # Quick start script (Windows)
├── MASTER_GUIDE.md         # Complete system documentation
└── README.md               # This file
```

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- **Python 3.8+** (Python 3.13.5 recommended)
- **Modern web browser** (Chrome, Edge, Firefox)
- **Webcam**
- **Windows** (for PowerShell scripts)

### Installation

**1. Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone <your-repo-url>
cd "Pose2Play base model iteration 1"
```

**2. Set up Python environment**
```powershell
# Navigate to ml directory
cd ml

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv rl_env

# Activate environment
.\rl_env\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**3. Download Dataset** (Required for training)

Place the `Dataset/` folder in the parent directory:
```
├── Dataset/
│   ├── inertial/
│   │   ├── lower/
│   │   └── upper/
│   └── optical/
└── Pose2Play base model iteration 1/
    └── ml/
```

### Running the System

#### Option 1: Quick Start (Recommended)

```powershell
# From project root directory
.\START_PHASE7.ps1
```

This will:
1. Start Flask API server (RL + Form Classification)
2. Open demo in browser
3. Ready to use!

#### Option 2: Manual Start

```powershell
# Terminal 1: Start API server
cd ml
.\rl_env\Scripts\activate
python api_server.py

# Terminal 2: Open demo
# Open demo/index.html in your browser
```

### Using the Demo

1. **Allow camera access** when prompted
2. **Click "Start Detection"**
3. **Select exercise** from dropdown
4. **Start exercising!**
5. **Watch the panels:**
   - **Form Quality Panel** - Real-time form corrections
   - **Gamification Panel** - RP, levels, achievements
   - **Adaptive Learning** - Personalized targets

## 🧪 Training Models (Optional)

### Prerequisites

Make sure you've:
1. Downloaded the Dataset
2. Activated virtual environment (`.\rl_env\Scripts\activate`)

### Step 1: Process Dataset

```powershell
cd ml
python data_processor.py --input ..\Dataset --output .\data\processed
```

**Output:**
- `data/processed/train.csv` (1526 samples)
- `data/processed/val.csv` (270 samples)
- `data/processed/test.csv` (908 samples)

### Step 2: Train Form Classifier

```powershell
python train_form_classifier.py --model rf --output .\models\form_classifier
```

**Output:**
- `models/form_classifier/form_classifier_rf.pkl` (70.9% test accuracy)
- Training time: ~30 seconds

### Step 3: Train RL Agent

```powershell
python train_rl.py --algorithm DQN --timesteps 100000 --output .\models\dqn
```

**Output:**
- `models/dqn/DQN_rehab_final.zip` (902 mean reward, 100% completion)
- Training time: ~30 minutes
- Logs: `logs/DQN_<timestamp>/`

### Step 4: Evaluate Models

```powershell
# Test form classifier
python test_form_api.py

# Evaluate RL agent
python train_rl.py --mode eval --algorithm DQN --model .\models\dqn\DQN_rehab_final.zip
```

## 🔍 API Endpoints

The Flask server (`http://localhost:5000`) provides:

### GET /health
Check server status
```json
{
  "status": "ok",
  "rl_model_loaded": true,
  "form_classifier_loaded": true
}
```

### POST /predict
RL difficulty adjustment
```json
Request: {
  "state": [20-element array]
}

Response: {
  "action": 0,
  "action_name": "encourage",
  "confidence": 0.95
}
```

### POST /predict_form_simple
Webcam-based form analysis
```json
Request: {
  "angles": { "knee_left": 85, "knee_right": 87 },
  "movement_speed": 2.5,
  "exercise_type": "squat"
}

Response: {
  "form_quality": "95.0%",
  "is_correct": true,
  "feedback": ["✅ Excellent form!"],
  "corrections": [],
  "issues_detected": []
}
```

## 📊 Model Performance

### Form Classifier (Random Forest)
- **Test Accuracy:** 70.9%
- **Precision (Correct Form):** 68%
- **Recall (Correct Form):** 81%
- **Training Samples:** 1,268 (hip/knee/shoulder exercises)

### RL Agent (DQN)
- **Mean Reward:** 902 (180% above target)
- **Completion Rate:** 100% (vs 70% baseline)
- **Training Episodes:** 100,000 timesteps
- **Learned Strategy:** "Encouragement-First" (90% encouragement, minimal difficulty increases)

## 🛠️ Troubleshooting

### Issue: API not connecting
**Solution:**
```powershell
# Check if API is running
curl http://localhost:5000/health

# Restart API
cd ml
.\rl_env\Scripts\activate
python api_server.py
```

### Issue: Form panel shows "Ready" but no updates
**Solution:**
- Check browser console (F12) for errors
- Verify API is running (`/health` returns 200)
- Try refreshing browser

### Issue: Models not found
**Solution:**
```powershell
# Check if models exist
ls ml\models\dqn
ls ml\models\form_classifier

# If missing, train models (see Training Models section)
```

### Issue: Camera not working
**Solution:**
- Allow camera permissions in browser
- Check if another app is using camera
- Try different browser (Chrome recommended)

## 📚 Documentation

- **MASTER_GUIDE.md** - Complete system documentation (3500+ lines)
  - All 8 phases: Demo → Training → Evaluation → Integration
  - Step-by-step testing guides
  - Troubleshooting reference
  - Architecture diagrams

## 🔧 Development

### Adding New Exercises

1. Create exercise checker in `demo/index.html`:
```javascript
function checkNewExercise(angle) {
    // State machine logic
}
```

2. Update exercise dropdown:
```html
<option value="new_exercise">New Exercise</option>
```

3. Add to form analysis in `ml/form_feedback.py`:
```python
EXERCISE_FEEDBACK = {
    'new_exercise': {
        'correct': ["Great!"],
        'incorrect_patterns': {...}
    }
}
```

### Customizing RL Behavior

Edit `ml/train_rl.py`:
- Adjust reward function
- Modify state space (20 dimensions)
- Change action space (5 actions)
- Tune hyperparameters

### Improving Form Classifier

```powershell
# Try neural network instead of Random Forest
python train_form_classifier.py --model mlp

# Adjust thresholds in ml/form_feedback.py
THRESHOLDS = {
    'asymmetry_max': 0.15,  # Change to 0.10 for stricter
    ...
}
```

## 🤝 Contributing

When making changes:

1. **Test thoroughly** - Run test suite
```powershell
python test_form_api.py
```

2. **Update documentation** - Modify MASTER_GUIDE.md if adding features

3. **Follow code style** - Keep consistent with existing code

4. **Commit messages** - Use clear, descriptive messages

## 📝 System Requirements

### Minimum:
- CPU: Intel i5 or equivalent
- RAM: 8 GB
- Python: 3.8+
- Browser: Chrome 90+, Firefox 88+, Edge 90+

### Recommended:
- CPU: Intel i7 or equivalent
- RAM: 16 GB
- Python: 3.13+
- Webcam: 720p @ 30fps

## 🎓 Citation

If you use this project in your research:

```bibtex
@software{pose2play2025,
  title = {Pose2Play: AI-Powered Rehabilitation System},
  author = {Your Team Name},
  year = {2025},
  description = {Real-time exercise form analysis using ML and RL}
}
```

## 📄 License

See LICENSE file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **MediaPipe** - Pose detection library
- **Stable-Baselines3** - RL training framework
- **scikit-learn** - ML classification models
- **Dataset** - Rehabilitation exercise recordings (29 subjects)

## 📧 Contact

For questions or issues:
- Open a GitHub issue
- Contact: [Your email/team contact]

---

**Built:** October 2025  
**Status:** ✅ Production Ready  
**Version:** 2.0 - Form Classification Integrated  
**Models:** Trained and tested (70.9% form accuracy, 100% RL completion rate)

Commit message:

Add PHYTMO dataset link and clarify pre-trained models are included

README.md, after:

# Pose2Play - AI-Powered Rehabilitation System

Real-time exercise form analysis and adaptive difficulty adjustment using computer vision and reinforcement learning.

## 🎯 Features

- **Real-time Pose Detection** - MediaPipe tracks 33 body landmarks at 30 FPS
- **Exercise Form Analysis** - ML classifier detects correct vs incorrect form (70.9% accuracy)
- **RL-Powered Difficulty Adjustment** - Agent learned optimal encouragement strategy (100% completion rate)
- **Gamification** - Recovery Points, levels, achievements, streaks
- **Adaptive Learning** - Per-user personalized targets based on performance history
- **Real-time Feedback** - Specific form corrections ("Squat deeper", "Balance evenly")

## 🏥 Target Exercises

- Squats (knee rehabilitation)
- Hip Abduction/Adduction (hip strengthening)
- Knee Flexion (knee mobility)
- Shoulder Raises (shoulder rehabilitation)

## 📦 Project Structure

```
Pose2Play base model iteration 1/
├── demo/
│   └── index.html           # Main web application
├── ml/
│   ├── data/
│   │   └── processed/       # Processed dataset (train/val/test)
│   ├── models/
│   │   ├── dqn/            # RL difficulty adjustment model
│   │   └── form_classifier/ # Form classification model
│   ├── train_rl.py         # Train RL agent
│   ├── train_form_classifier.py  # Train form classifier
│   ├── api_server.py       # Flask API server
│   ├── data_processor.py   # Dataset preprocessing
│   └── test_form_api.py    # API testing
├── shared/
│   └── models/
│       └── pose_landmarker_lite.task  # MediaPipe model
├── START_PHASE7.ps1        # Quick start script (Windows)
├── MASTER_GUIDE.md         # Complete system documentation
└── README.md               # This file
```

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- **Python 3.8+** (Python 3.13.5 recommended)
- **Modern web browser** (Chrome, Edge, Firefox)
- **Webcam**
- **Windows** (for PowerShell scripts)

### Installation

**1. Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone <your-repo-url>
cd "Pose2Play base model iteration 1"
```

**2. Set up Python environment**
```powershell
# Navigate to ml directory
cd ml

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv rl_env

# Activate environment
.\rl_env\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**3. Pre-trained Models** ✅

Good news! **Pre-trained models are already included** in this repository:
- `ml/models/dqn/DQN_rehab_final.zip` - RL agent (trained)
- `ml/models/form_classifier/form_classifier_rf.pkl` - Form classifier (trained)

**You can skip training and use the system immediately!**

**4. Download Dataset** (Optional - only needed for retraining)

If you want to retrain the models, download the PHYTMO dataset:

**Dataset Source:** [PHYTMO Dataset on Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/6319979/files/PHYTMO.zip)

After downloading, extract and place the `Dataset/` folder in the parent directory:
```
├── Dataset/
│   ├── inertial/
│   │   ├── lower/
│   │   └── upper/
│   └── optical/
└── Pose2Play base model iteration 1/
    └── ml/
```

### Running the System

#### Option 1: Quick Start (Recommended)

```powershell
# From project root directory
.\START_PHASE7.ps1
```

This will:
1. Start Flask API server (RL + Form Classification)
2. Open demo in browser
3. Ready to use!

#### Option 2: Manual Start

```powershell
# Terminal 1: Start API server
cd ml
.\rl_env\Scripts\activate
python api_server.py

# Terminal 2: Open demo
# Open demo/index.html in your browser
```

### Using the Demo

1. **Allow camera access** when prompted
2. **Click "Start Detection"**
3. **Select exercise** from dropdown
4. **Start exercising!**
5. **Watch the panels:**
   - **Form Quality Panel** - Real-time form corrections
   - **Gamification Panel** - RP, levels, achievements
   - **Adaptive Learning** - Personalized targets

## 🧪 Training Models (Optional)

**Note:** Pre-trained models are already included! This section is only needed if you want to:
- Retrain with different hyperparameters
- Experiment with new algorithms
- Use your own dataset

### Prerequisites

Make sure you've:
1. Downloaded the [PHYTMO Dataset](https://zenodo.org/records/6319979/files/PHYTMO.zip)
2. Activated virtual environment (`.\rl_env\Scripts\activate`)

### Step 1: Process Dataset

```powershell
cd ml
python data_processor.py --input ..\Dataset --output .\data\processed
```

**Output:**
- `data/processed/train.csv` (1526 samples)
- `data/processed/val.csv` (270 samples)
- `data/processed/test.csv` (908 samples)

### Step 2: Train Form Classifier

```powershell
python train_form_classifier.py --model rf --output .\models\form_classifier
```

**Output:**
- `models/form_classifier/form_classifier_rf.pkl` (70.9% test accuracy)
- Training time: ~30 seconds

### Step 3: Train RL Agent

```powershell
python train_rl.py --algorithm DQN --timesteps 100000 --output .\models\dqn
```

**Output:**
- `models/dqn/DQN_rehab_final.zip` (902 mean reward, 100% completion)
- Training time: ~30 minutes
- Logs: `logs/DQN_<timestamp>/`

### Step 4: Evaluate Models

```powershell
# Test form classifier
python test_form_api.py

# Evaluate RL agent
python train_rl.py --mode eval --algorithm DQN --model .\models\dqn\DQN_rehab_final.zip
```

## 🔍 API Endpoints

The Flask server (`http://localhost:5000`) provides:

### GET /health
Check server status
```json
{
  "status": "ok",
  "rl_model_loaded": true,
  "form_classifier_loaded": true
}
```

### POST /predict
RL difficulty adjustment
```json
Request: {
  "state": [20-element array]
}

Response: {
  "action": 0,
  "action_name": "encourage",
  "confidence": 0.95
}
```

### POST /predict_form_simple
Webcam-based form analysis
```json
Request: {
  "angles": { "knee_left": 85, "knee_right": 87 },
  "movement_speed": 2.5,
  "exercise_type": "squat"
}

Response: {
  "form_quality": "95.0%",
  "is_correct": true,
  "feedback": ["✅ Excellent form!"],
  "corrections": [],
  "issues_detected": []
}
```

## 📊 Model Performance

### Form Classifier (Random Forest)
- **Test Accuracy:** 70.9%
- **Precision (Correct Form):** 68%
- **Recall (Correct Form):** 81%
- **Training Samples:** 1,268 (hip/knee/shoulder exercises)

### RL Agent (DQN)
- **Mean Reward:** 902 (180% above target)
- **Completion Rate:** 100% (vs 70% baseline)
- **Training Episodes:** 100,000 timesteps
- **Learned Strategy:** "Encouragement-First" (90% encouragement, minimal difficulty increases)

## 🛠️ Troubleshooting

### Issue: API not connecting
**Solution:**
```powershell
# Check if API is running
curl http://localhost:5000/health

# Restart API
cd ml
.\rl_env\Scripts\activate
python api_server.py
```

### Issue: Form panel shows "Ready" but no updates
**Solution:**
- Check browser console (F12) for errors
- Verify API is running (`/health` returns 200)
- Try refreshing browser

### Issue: Models not found
**Solution:**
```powershell
# Check if models exist
ls ml\models\dqn
ls ml\models\form_classifier

# If missing, train models (see Training Models section)
```

### Issue: Camera not working
**Solution:**
- Allow camera permissions in browser
- Check if another app is using camera
- Try different browser (Chrome recommended)

## 📚 Documentation

- **MASTER_GUIDE.md** - Complete system documentation (3500+ lines)
  - All 8 phases: Demo → Training → Evaluation → Integration
  - Step-by-step testing guides
  - Troubleshooting reference
  - Architecture diagrams

## 🔧 Development

### Adding New Exercises

1. Create exercise checker in `demo/index.html`:
```javascript
function checkNewExercise(angle) {
    // State machine logic
}
```

2. Update exercise dropdown:
```html
<option value="new_exercise">New Exercise</option>
```

3. Add to form analysis in `ml/form_feedback.py`:
```python
EXERCISE_FEEDBACK = {
    'new_exercise': {
        'correct': ["Great!"],
        'incorrect_patterns': {...}
    }
}
```

### Customizing RL Behavior

Edit `ml/train_rl.py`:
- Adjust reward function
- Modify state space (20 dimensions)
- Change action space (5 actions)
- Tune hyperparameters

### Improving Form Classifier

```powershell
# Try neural network instead of Random Forest
python train_form_classifier.py --model mlp

# Adjust thresholds in ml/form_feedback.py
THRESHOLDS = {
    'asymmetry_max': 0.15,  # Change to 0.10 for stricter
    ...
}
```

## 🤝 Contributing

When making changes:

1. **Test thoroughly** - Run test suite
```powershell
python test_form_api.py
```

2. **Update documentation** - Modify MASTER_GUIDE.md if adding features

3. **Follow code style** - Keep consistent with existing code

4. **Commit messages** - Use clear, descriptive messages

## 📝 System Requirements

### Minimum:
- CPU: Intel i5 or equivalent
- RAM: 8 GB
- Python: 3.8+
- Browser: Chrome 90+, Firefox 88+, Edge 90+

### Recommended:
- CPU: Intel i7 or equivalent
- RAM: 16 GB
- Python: 3.13+
- Webcam: 720p @ 30fps

## 🎓 Citation

If you use this project in your research:

```bibtex
@software{pose2play2025,
  title = {Pose2Play: AI-Powered Rehabilitation System},
  author = {Your Team Name},
  year = {2025},
  description = {Real-time exercise form analysis using ML and RL}
}
```

## 📄 License

See LICENSE file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **MediaPipe** - Pose detection library
- **Stable-Baselines3** - RL training framework
- **scikit-learn** - ML classification models
- **PHYTMO Dataset** - Rehabilitation exercise recordings (29 subjects)
  - Source: [Zenodo - PHYTMO Dataset](https://zenodo.org/records/6319979)
  - Citation: Physical Therapy Motion Dataset for rehabilitation research

## 📧 Contact

For questions or issues:
- Open a GitHub issue
- Contact: [Your email/team contact]

---

**Built:** October 2025  
**Status:** ✅ Production Ready  
**Version:** 2.0 - Form Classification Integrated  
**Models:** Trained and tested (70.9% form accuracy, 100% RL completion rate)
